Visual Editor quickstart guide (#6770)
dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/guides/visual-editor-qs.md

recently_updated: true
---

<div style={{maxWidth: '900px'}}>

## Introduction

:::note beta feature

The Visual Editor is currently in a limited beta. [Contact us](https://www.getdbt.com/contact/) if you're interested in becoming a part of it. Features currently in the beta are subject to change or removal.

:::

The dbt Cloud Visual Editor offers a quick and simple way for anyone to build models for analytics, no background in analytics engineering required! In this guide, you will learn about:

- Access the Visual Editor and creating a new model
- How to navigate the interface
- How to build a model using operators
- How to commit your changes to Git
- Locating your Visual Editor model and data

## Prerequisites

To use the Visual Editor, you must meet the following prerequisites:

- Your account must have the following configured:
    - A data warehouse connection
    - Integration with a Git provider
- Source models for the Visual Editor must have been run at least once
- You must have a `developer` license
- The examples in this guide use the [Jaffle Shop](https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle-shop) repo sample project. You can use your own existing data with this guide.

> ## Access the Visual Editor

Author: Proper noun!

---
title: "Quickstart for the dbt Cloud Visual Editor"
id: "visual-editor"
level: 'Beginner'
icon: 'dbt'
hide_table_of_contents: true
tags: ['Visual Editor','Analyist', 'dbt Cloud','model']
recently_updated: true
---

<div style={{maxWidth: '900px'}}>

## Introduction

:::note beta feature

The Visual Editor is currently in a limited beta. [Contact us](https://www.getdbt.com/contact/) if you're interested in joining it. Features currently in the beta are subject to change or removal.

:::

> The dbt Cloud Visual Editor offers a quick and straightforward way for anyone to build analytics models, no background in analytics engineering required! In this guide, you will learn about:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dbt Cloud Visual Editor offers a quick and straightforward way for anyone to build analytics models, no background in analytics engineering is required! In this guide, you will learn about:
```

- Accessing the Visual Editor and creating a new model
- How to navigate the interface
- How to build a model using operators
- How to commit your changes to Git
- Locating your Visual Editor model and data

## Prerequisites

To use the Visual Editor, you must meet the following prerequisites:

- Your account must have the following configured:
    - A data warehouse connection
    - Integration with a Git provider
- Source models for the Visual Editor must have been run at least once
- You must have a `developer` license
- You must have credentials configured for your data warehouse and Git provider in the **Your profile** section of the **Account settings**. 

:::note

> The examples in this guide use the [Jaffle Shop](https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle-shop) GitHub repo sample project. You can use your data, but the Jaffle Shop offers a full-featured project useful for testing dbt features. Ask your dbt Cloud administrator about importing it to a project in your environment. They must also execute `dbt run` on the Jaffle Shop project before you begin, or you will be unable to reference the source models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The examples in this guide use the [Jaffle Shop](https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle-shop) GitHub repo sample project. You can use your own data, but the Jaffle Shop offers a full-featured project useful for testing dbt features. Ask your dbt Cloud administrator about importing it to a project in your environment. They must also execute `dbt run` on the Jaffle Shop project before you begin, or you will be unable to reference the source models.
```

> The examples in this guide use the [Jaffle Shop](https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle-shop) GitHub repo sample project. You can use your own data, but the Jaffle Shop offers a full-featured project useful for testing dbt features. Ask your dbt Cloud administrator about importing it to a project in your environment. They must also execute `dbt run` on the Jaffle Shop project before you begin, or you will be unable to reference the source models.

Reviewer 2: don't they need to build the full jaffle shop dataset in prod before it's usable in VE? rather than just a dbt run in dev?

Author: Good question! WIll get an answer and clarify

Reviewer 3: yep, they'll need a prod run before this is useable.

:::

## Access the Visual Editor

To access the Visual Editor:

1. Click **Develop** from the main menu. If you do not see the **Develop** option, ensure you have selected a **Project** from the menu.
2. Click **Visual Editor**.

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/ve-main-menu.png" width="90%" title="Visual Editor in the main menu."/>

3. From the right side, click **Get started** and then click **Create new model**.

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/ve-create-new-model.png" width="90%" title="Create a new model from the Visual Editor landing page."/>

## Navigating the interface

The Visual editor comprises a series of menus activated by clicking icons surrounding the border of the larger canvas. With none of the menu items activated, the workspace looks like this:

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/ve-screen.png" width="90%" title="The Visual Editor canvas. The number of items is defined in this section." />

Click on an icon to expand its section or execute an action depending on its purpose. The options are as follows:

1. The model's title. This defaults to "Untitled" but can be edited anytime by clicking on it.

> 2. The **Operators** menu contains the building blocks of creating a model with the editor. 

Reviewer 2: in these docs: https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/cloud/visual-editor-interface you call it the "Operator toolbar"--are you married to menu or toolbar? I have called it the operator toolbar in the lesson outline. 

not sure how important this is lol just flagging that it's called different stuff

Author: Let's stick with toolbar!

> 2. The **Operators** menu contains the building blocks of creating a model with the editor. 

Author: ```suggestion
2. The **Operators** toolbar contains the building blocks of creating a model with the editor. 
```

> 2. The **Operators** menu contains the building blocks of [creating a model](#create-a-model) with the editor. 

Reviewer: Hiya @matthewshaver 

It could just be me, but when I click this link, it doesn't take me to a page and when I right click to open the link in a new window, I'm directed to the same page.

Kind Regards
Natalie

> 2. The **Operators** menu contains the building blocks of [creating a model](#create-a-model) with the editor. 

Author: I thought that worked on guides. I'll remove

> 2. The **Operators** menu contains the building blocks of [creating a model](#create-a-model) with the editor. 

Author: ```suggestion
2. The **Operators** menu contains the building blocks of creating a model with the editor. 
```

> 3. The **SQL code** area that displays the [SQL that compiles your model](#sql-code).

Author: I removed that section!> Good catch!
```suggestion
3. The **SQL code** area displays the SQL that compiles your model.
```

> 3. The **SQL code** area that displays the [SQL that compiles your model](#sql-code).

Reviewer: Same for this link

> 4. The **Runs and previews** that displays [run data and previews data](#runs-and-previews) for individual operators.

Author: ```suggestion
4. The **Runs and previews** that displays run data and previews data for individual operators.
```

> 4. The **Runs and previews** that displays [run data and previews data](#runs-and-previews) for individual operators.

Reviewer: And this one too

5. The **Commit history** display.
6. The **Explorer** view of your model. 
7. The navigation tab that has icons for (from top to bottom):
    - Zoom in
    - Zoom out
    - Center the model to fit the screen
    - Auto-layout option for the individual operator tiles
8. The **Run** command executes `dbt run` for the model.

> 9. This button is initially a **Commit** command for your integrated Git provider. Changes will be made to "Open pull request" once changes are committed. This will not appear until a change is made requiring a commit. 

Reviewer 2: the wording feels a little unclear to me in number 9 here....maybe something closer to "The button will change to 'open pull request' once changes are committed"

> 9. This button is initially a **Commit** command for your integrated Git provider. Changes will be made to "Open pull request" once changes are committed. This will not appear until a change is made requiring a commit. 

Author: ```suggestion
9. This button is initially a **Commit** command for your integrated Git provider. It will change to "Open pull request" once your first commit is made. The button will not initially appear until you begin working in the canvas area.
```

> 9. This button is, initially, a **Commit** command for your integrated Git provider. Changes will be made to "Open pull request" once changes are committed. This will not appear until a change is made requiring a commit. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
9. This button is initially, a **Commit** command for your integrated Git provider. Changes will be made to "Open pull request" once changes are committed. This will not appear until a change is made requiring a commit. 
```

Author: We should remove both if we remove the first to keep the flow
```suggestion
9. This button is initially a **Commit** command for your integrated Git provider. Changes will be made to "Open pull request" once changes are committed. This will not appear until a change is made requiring a commit. 
```

### Operator tiles

The operators are drag-and-drop from their menu to the canvas, and when they are dropped they will create a tile.

The tiles have the same basic setup with different fields depending on their function. All operators except for **Model** must be connected to another tile before configuring. Once configured, they’ll have the same basic layout.

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/operator-tile.png" width="90%" title="An operator tile with configurations filled out." />

1. **The connectors:** Click-and-drag to the connector on another operator to link them.
2. **The title:** Click to change. The examples in this guide will remain default. 
3. **Play icon and menu:** Preview the data at any point in its transformation by clicking the tiles play icon. The dropdown menu contains the option to **Delete** a tile. 
4. **Column icon:** The number next to it represents the number of columns in the data at that point in its transformation.

:::tip

Make operator tile titles unique compared to your column names to avoid confusion, and the same applies to any aliases you create.

:::

> ### Create your source models

Reviewer 2: mixed feelings on calling these source models given that they're not dbt sources? is there another thing we could call them? maybe "create your first models"? especially since reading in sources is something that's coming to VE?

> ### Create your source models

Author: ```suggestion
### Create your model with pre-existing data
```

To get started:

1. Expand the **Operators** menu and drag the **Model** operator over to the canvas.
2. Click **Configure model** and then select the source `stg_models` from the dropdown. 
3. Click the **Output all columns** option.

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/one-model-operator.png" width="90%" title="A single model operator." />

> You now have your first data source!

Reviewer 2: also here.  maybe just "you now have your first model in visual editor" or something like that?

> You now have your first data source!

Author: ```suggestion
You now have your first model in Visual Editor!
```

4. Drag a new **Model** operator to the canvas below the first and repeat the previous steps, but this time set the source model to `stg_order_items`.

>     <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/two-model-operators.png" width="90%" title="Two model operators in te canvas."/>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/two-model-operators.png" width="90%" title="Two model operators in the canvas."/>
```

> Now, you have two source data models and are ready to transform the data!

Reviewer 2: same here w/source

> Now, you have two source data models and are ready to transform the data!

Author: ```suggestion
Now, you have two models and are ready to transform the data!
```

:::tip

> Don't see a source model you're looking for? Ask your dbt admins to ensure it's been run recently and hasn't gone stale.

Reviewer 2: same here w/source. and is it worth saying "been run in production" recently? the reader might not know what that means but their dbt admin would know.

> Don't see a source model you're looking for? Ask your dbt admins to ensure it's been run recently and hasn't gone stale.

Author: ```suggestion
Don't see a pre-existing model you're looking for? Ask your dbt admins to ensure it's been run recently and hasn't gone stale.
```

    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/join-connected.png" width="90%" title="The join is connected to two model operators." />

3. In the **Join** tile, click **Configure join condition.**
4. Set the **Join type** to `Inner`.
5. In the pair of dropdowns, set both `stg_orders` and `stg_order_items` to `ORDER_ID`.
6. Click **Select and rename columns** and click **Configure columns**
select the following columns:
    - From `stg_orders` click `ORDER_ID` and `CUSTOMER_ID`.
    - From `stg_order` click `PRODUCT_ID`.
    - Note: These will appear in the order they are clicked.
7. You've now built your join! Test it by clicking the **Play icon** in the top right corner of the join tile. Your data will populate in the **Runs and previews** pane.

    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/preview-join.png" width="90%" title="A completed join with the sample data." />

:::tip

Your work in the Visual Editor is automatically saved as you progress, so if you need a break, you can always come back to a session later. Just be sure to give it a unique title!

:::

## Enhance your model

> You've got the basics going with your Visual Editor model! It has successfully joined two source models, but you need to further transform the data to get what you need. A list of customers who buy repeat items as you consider a loyalty club rewards program.

Reviewer 2: flagging another source mention here

> You've got the basics going with your Visual Editor model! It has successfully joined two source models, but you need to further transform the data to get what you need. A list of customers who buy repeat items as you consider a loyalty club rewards program.

Author: ```suggestion
You've got the basics going with your Visual Editor model! It has successfully joined two pre-existing models, but you need to transform the data further to get what you need. A list of customers who buy repeat items as you consider a loyalty club rewards program.
```

:::tip

As your model grows, you can zoom in and out to view your needs. Click and hold in empty canvas space to drag your setup across the screen. Click the **Fit view** icon to see your entire model on the screen. Click the **Auto layout** icon to auto-arrange the tiles efficiently. 

:::

### Add some order

There's a lot of data there. Dozens of customers are buying hundreds of products. You will sort it so that the customers are listed ascending by their CUSTOMER_ID number, with the most purchased products listed in descending order. 

1. Drag the **Order** operator over to the right of the **Aggregation** tile and connec them.
2. Click **Configure order**.
3. In the **Sort order** field click **Select column** and click `Aggregation1.CUSTOMER_ID` from the dropdown. Set it to `Asc`. 
4. Click **Add sorting** and in the new **Select column** field select `Aggregation1.count_PRODUCT_ID`. Set it to `Desc`.
5. Press the **Play icon** to preview the new data.

    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/order.png" width="90%" title="The ordered data operator tile config and data preview." />

:::tip

> Want to practice on your own? Try adding a **Filter** operator that removes items with less than 10 sales for any customer ID. Be sure to run the preview and verify the data is correct.

Reviewer 4: i love this!! 🔥

Author: Thank you!

Reviewer 2: agreed, excellent practice item here!

:::

## Run and share your model

Now that you've built a model that results in the data you want, it's time to run it and push it to your Git repo.

### Run

> To run your model, you only need to click the big **Run** button. With the Visual Editor, there is no command line and no need to memorize a list of commands; there is only **Run**. Click it to see the results populate in the **Runs and previews** pane.

Reviewer 2: awesome callout here

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/preview-data.png" width="90%" title="Preview of the transformed data in Snowflake." />

### Git commit

The models built in the Visual Editor are a part of your larger dbt project. They are stored in the `visual_editor` folder of your `/models` directory. This is all done automatically; you don't have to configure any paths or directories. 

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/ve-model-folder.png" width="90%" title="Example of the Visual Editors model path in GitHub." />

However, it won't be created in your Git repo until you commit your first model. So, back in the model's view:

1. Click **Commit** in the top right.
    - If you've already created a commit and wish to make more, click the arrow next to **Create a pull request** to see the **Commit** option.
2. Fill out the **Description** field with information about your model. If it's long, part of it will be included in the pull request title, and the rest will be in the body. That's okay! You can correct it during the PR creation process. 

> 3. Click **Commmit**. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. Click **Commit**. 
```

4. The **Commit** button will change to **Create a pull request**. You can add more commits, but click the **Create a pull request** button for now. You will then be redirected to your Git provider in a new tab.

The following examples use GitHub as the provider:

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/demo-model-github.png" width="90%" title="Example of the screen you're taken to in GitHub when you create a pull request from the Visual Editor." />

5. Click **Create pull request** in the GitHub window.

> 6. Complete the **Add a title** and **Add a description** fields. If your description is split between both, copy all the contents to the description field and give it a shorter title.

Reviewer: Hiya @matthewshaver 

This is probably just me being slow but with the sentence "If your description is split between both..." do you mean if the title is split between both the title and description boxes?

Kind Regards
Natalie

Reviewer: Actually, ignore this. It's explained clearly in the following sentence

Author: No problem!

7. Click **Create pull request**.

You've just submitted your first model from the Visual Editor for review. Once approved and merged, the model will be included in your organization’s project and run whenever `dbt run` is executed in any environment it is in. You're now on your way to becoming an expert in data transformation!

> 

Author: ```suggestion
:::tip

Want to take your skills to the next level? Try taking the SQL output from your Visual Editor model and using it to create a model in the [IDE](/docs/cloud/dbt-cloud-ide/develop-in-the-cloud). 

:::
```

---
title: "Quickstart for the dbt Cloud Visual Editor"
id: "visual-editor"
level: 'Beginner'
icon: 'dbt'
hide_table_of_contents: true
tags: ['Visual Editor','Analyist', 'dbt Cloud','model']
recently_updated: true
---

<div style={{maxWidth: '900px'}}>

## Introduction

:::note beta feature

The Visual Editor is currently in a limited beta. [Contact us](https://www.getdbt.com/contact/) if you're interested in joining it. Features currently in the beta are subject to change or removal.

:::

The dbt Cloud Visual Editor offers a quick and straightforward way for anyone to build analytics models, no background in analytics engineering is required! In this guide, you will learn about:

- Accessing the Visual Editor and creating a new model
- How to navigate the interface
- How to build a model using operators
- How to commit your changes to Git
- Locating your Visual Editor model and data

## Prerequisites

> To use the Visual Editor, you must meet the following prerequisites:

Reviewer 3: Enterprise only as well!

:::note

The examples in this guide use the [Jaffle Shop](https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle-shop) GitHub repo sample project. You can use your own data, but the Jaffle Shop offers a full-featured project useful for testing dbt features. Ask your dbt Cloud administrator about importing it to a project in your environment. They must also execute `dbt run` on the Jaffle Shop project before you begin, or you will be unable to reference the source models.

:::

## Access the Visual Editor

To access the Visual Editor:

1. Click **Develop** from the main menu. If you do not see the **Develop** option, ensure you have selected a **Project** from the menu.
2. Click **Visual Editor**.

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/ve-main-menu.png" width="90%" title="Visual Editor in the main menu."/>

3. From the right side, click **Get started** and then click **Create new model**.

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/ve-create-new-model.png" width="90%" title="Create a new model from the Visual Editor landing page."/>

## Navigating the interface

> The Visual editor comprises a series of menus activated by clicking icons surrounding the border of the larger canvas. With none of the menu items activated, the workspace looks like this:

Reviewer 3: nit: capitalize Editor

> The Visual editor comprises a series of menus activated by clicking icons surrounding the border of the larger canvas. With none of the menu items activated, the workspace looks like this:

Author: ```suggestion
The Visual Editor comprises a series of menus activated by clicking icons surrounding the border of the larger canvas. With none of the menu items activated, the workspace looks like this:
```

6. The **Explorer** view of your model. 
7. The navigation tab that has icons for (from top to bottom):
    - Zoom in
    - Zoom out
    - Center the model to fit the screen
    - Auto-layout option for the individual operator tiles
8. The **Run** command executes `dbt run` for the model.
9. This button is initially a **Commit** command for your integrated Git provider. It will change to "Open pull request" once your first commit is made. The button will not initially appear until you begin working in the canvas area.

## Create a model

This section will walk you through creating a model with operators using sample data from the [Jaffle Shop](https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle-shop) project. With this guide, you will create a basic model that transforms two datasets to build a view of repeat customer purchases while you consider a loyalty program for your shop. 

The operators are the heart of your model. They determine what data will be transformed and how. Click the **+** icon to open the operator menu.

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/operators.png" width="90%" title="The operator’s menu on the side of the Visual Editor canvas." />

> Read more about the [individual operators](/docs/cloud/visual-editor-interface#operators) to understand the basic purpose of each. Keep in mind that the model you're creating relies on existing models and that the term will primarily be used to reference the model operator in this section.

Reviewer 3: I'd clarify the second half of this sentence. Maybe:

"The dbt model created by the Visual Editor builds off of existing models - in these docs, the term "model" will primarily refer to the model operator found this operator drawer."

### Operator tiles

The operators are drag-and-drop from their menu to the canvas, and when they are dropped they will create a tile.

The tiles have the same basic setup with different fields depending on their function. All operators except for **Model** must be connected to another tile before configuring. Once configured, they’ll have the same basic layout.

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/operator-tile.png" width="90%" title="An operator tile with configurations filled out." />

1. **The connectors:** Click-and-drag to the connector on another operator to link them.

> 2. **The title:** Click to change. The examples in this guide will remain default. 

Reviewer 3: "In images in this guide, the operators names are kept as the defaults."

> 2. **The title:** Click to change. The examples in this guide will remain default. 

Author: ```suggestion
2. **The title:** Click to change. The examples and images in this guide will use the default names. 
```

> 3. **Play icon and menu:** Preview the data at any point in its transformation by clicking the tiles play icon. The dropdown menu contains the option to **Delete** a tile. 

Reviewer 3: nit: tile's

> 3. **Play icon and menu:** Preview the data at any point in its transformation by clicking the tiles play icon. The dropdown menu contains the option to **Delete** a tile. 

Author: ```suggestion
3. **Play icon and menu:** Preview the data at any point in its transformation by clicking the tile's **play icon**. The dropdown menu contains the option to **Delete** a tile. 
```

4. **Column icon:** The number next to it represents the number of columns in the data at that point in its transformation.

:::tip

Make operator tile titles unique compared to your column names to avoid confusion, and the same applies to any aliases you create.

:::

> ### Create your model with pre-existing data

Reviewer 3: should we clarify that this is building from a pre-existing dbt model?

> ### Create your model with pre-existing data

Author: ```suggestion
### Create your model from pre-existing models
```

To get started:

1. Expand the **Operators** menu and drag the **Model** operator over to the canvas.
2. Click **Configure model** and then select the source `stg_models` from the dropdown. 

> 3. Click the **Output all columns** option.

Reviewer 3: this section rocks!

Now, you have two models and are ready to transform the data!

:::tip

Don't see a pre-existing model you're looking for? Ask your dbt admins to ensure it's been run recently and hasn't gone stale.

:::

### Create a join

1. From the **Operators** menu, drag the **Join** operator onto the canvas to the right of the source models. 
    
    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/join-not-connected.png" width="90%" title="A join that has not been connected to the models" />

2. Click and drag a line from the **+** connector below the `L` on the join border to the **+** on the `stg_orders` model. Do the same for the `R` connector to the `stg_order_items` model.

    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/join-connected.png" width="90%" title="The join is connected to two model operators." />

3. In the **Join** tile, click **Configure join condition.**
4. Set the **Join type** to `Inner`.
5. In the pair of dropdowns, set both `stg_orders` and `stg_order_items` to `ORDER_ID`.
6. Click **Select and rename columns** and click **Configure columns**
select the following columns:
    - From `stg_orders` click `ORDER_ID` and `CUSTOMER_ID`.

>     - From `stg_order` click `PRODUCT_ID`.

Reviewer 5: should this be `stg_order_items`?

>     - From `stg_order` click `PRODUCT_ID`.

Author: ```suggestion
    - From `stg_order_items` click `PRODUCT_ID`.
```

    - Note: These will appear in the order they are clicked.
7. You've now built your join! Test it by clicking the **Play icon** in the top right corner of the join tile. Your data will populate in the **Runs and previews** pane.

    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/preview-join.png" width="90%" title="A completed join with the sample data." />

:::tip

Your work in the Visual Editor is automatically saved as you progress, so if you need a break, you can always come back to a session later. Just be sure to give it a unique title!

:::

## Enhance your model

> You've got the basics going with your Visual Editor model! It has successfully joined two pre-existing models, but you need to transform the data further to get what you need. A list of customers who buy repeat items as you consider a loyalty club rewards program.

Reviewer 3: nit: fragment

> You've got the basics going with your Visual Editor model! It has successfully joined two pre-existing models, but you need to transform the data further to get what you need. A list of customers who buy repeat items as you consider a loyalty club rewards program.

Author: ```suggestion
You've got the basics going with your Visual Editor model! It has successfully joined two pre-existing models, but you want to transform the data further to get what you need: a list of customers who buy repeat items as you consider a loyalty club rewards program.
```

:::

### Add some order

There's a lot of data there. Dozens of customers are buying hundreds of products. You will sort it so that the customers are listed ascending by their CUSTOMER_ID number, with the most purchased products listed in descending order. 

1. Drag the **Order** operator over to the right of the **Aggregation** tile and connec them.
2. Click **Configure order**.
3. In the **Sort order** field click **Select column** and click `Aggregation1.CUSTOMER_ID` from the dropdown. Set it to `Asc`. 
4. Click **Add sorting** and in the new **Select column** field select `Aggregation1.count_PRODUCT_ID`. Set it to `Desc`.
5. Press the **Play icon** to preview the new data.

    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/order.png" width="90%" title="The ordered data operator tile config and data preview." />

:::tip

Want to practice on your own? Try adding a **Filter** operator that removes items with less than 10 sales for any customer ID. Be sure to run the preview and verify the data is correct.

:::

## Run and share your model

> Now that you've built a model that results in the data you want, it's time to run it and push it to your Git repo.

Reviewer 3: I would break this down and recap how preview/run/prod work at the top, since it's a new concept.
1. preview does not affect state in your warehouse, so you can test and develop.
2. when you're ready to use this mode in a downstream tool, you can run it to materialize it in the warehouse.
3. Once the model is ready to make its way to production and be used by others or orchestrated, you can commit and open a PR.

1. Click **Commit** in the top right.
    - If you've already created a commit and wish to make more, click the arrow next to **Create a pull request** to see the **Commit** option.
2. Fill out the **Description** field with information about your model. If it's long, part of it will be included in the pull request title, and the rest will be in the body. That's okay! You can correct it during the PR creation process. 
3. Click **Commit**. 
4. The **Commit** button will change to **Create a pull request**. You can add more commits, but click the **Create a pull request** button for now. You will then be redirected to your Git provider in a new tab.

The following examples use GitHub as the provider:

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/demo-model-github.png" width="90%" title="Example of the screen you're taken to in GitHub when you create a pull request from the Visual Editor." />

5. Click **Create pull request** in the GitHub window.
6. Complete the **Add a title** and **Add a description** fields. If your description is split between both, copy all the contents to the description field and give it a shorter title.
7. Click **Create pull request**.

> You've just submitted your first model from the Visual Editor for review. Once approved and merged, the model will be included in your organization’s project and run whenever `dbt run` is executed in any environment it is in. You're now on your way to becoming an expert in data transformation!

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
You've just submitted your first model from the Visual Editor for review. Once approved and merged, the model will be included in your organization’s project and run whenever `dbt run` is executed in any environment your model is in. You're now on your way to becoming an expert in data transformation!
```

---
title: "Quickstart for the dbt Cloud Visual Editor"
id: "visual-editor"
level: 'Beginner'
icon: 'dbt'
hide_table_of_contents: true
tags: ['Visual Editor','Analyist', 'dbt Cloud','model']
recently_updated: true
---

<div style={{maxWidth: '900px'}}>

## Introduction

:::note beta feature

The Visual Editor is currently in a limited beta. [Contact us](https://www.getdbt.com/contact/) if you're interested in joining it. Features currently in the beta are subject to change or removal.

:::

The dbt Cloud Visual Editor offers a quick and straightforward way for anyone to build analytics models, no background in analytics engineering is required! In this guide, you will learn about:

> - Accessing the Visual Editor and creating a new model

Reviewer 5: small nit: Can you make these bullets parallel?

- How to navigate the interface
- How to build a model using operators
- How to commit your changes to Git
- Locating your Visual Editor model and data

## Prerequisites

To use the Visual Editor, you must meet the following prerequisites:

- Be on an [Enterprise dbt Cloud account](/faqs/Accounts/cloud-upgrade-instructions#enterprise-plan).

> - Your account must have the following configured:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- You have the following configured on your account:
```

    - A data warehouse connection
    - Integration with a Git provider

> - Source models for the Visual Editor must have been run at least once

Reviewer 5: I think we can drop the "must" as these are prerequisites and all are musts.
```suggestion
- Source models for the Visual Editor have been run at least once
```

> - Source models for the Visual Editor must have been run at least once

Author: ```suggestion
- Source models for the Visual Editor must have been run at least once in production.
```

> - You must have a `developer` license

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- You have a `developer` license
```

> - You must have a `developer` license

Author: ```suggestion
- You have a `developer` license.
```

> - You must have credentials configured for your data warehouse and Git provider in the **Your profile** section of the **Account settings**. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- You have credentials configured for your data warehouse and Git provider in the **Your profile** section of the **Account settings**. 
```

:::note

> The examples in this guide use the [Jaffle Shop](https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle-shop) GitHub repo sample project. You can use your own data, but the Jaffle Shop offers a full-featured project useful for testing dbt features. Ask your dbt Cloud administrator about importing it to a project in your environment. They must also execute `dbt run` on the Jaffle Shop project in your `Production` environment before you begin, or you will be unable to reference the source models.

Reviewer 5: Should part of this note be a prereq? Just no sure how you want to phrase them:
* You have imported the Jaffle Shop project to a project in your environment. 
* Have a dbt Cloud Administrator execute `dbt run` on the Jaffle Shop project in your `Production` environment so you can reference the source models.

Author: The target audience for this guide is a persona that might not be able to get their dbt admin to run this in production. We don't want them to feel this guide isn't for them if they can't do that. We're using the call out to state up front that the examples use the Jaffle Shop, but they can still follow the learning path with their data if using the Jaffle Shop isn't possible. I fear if we list it as a pre-requisite they may avoid the guide if their admins won't let them run the Jaffle Shop in prod. The pre-requisites state only that whatever data you use must have been run in Prod at least once

Reviewer 5: @matthewshaver That makes sense. Can we title the note "prerequisites for using a Jaffle Shop project?"

Author: Great idea! I'll add it

:::

## Access the Visual Editor

To access the Visual Editor:

1. Click **Develop** from the main menu. If you do not see the **Develop** option, ensure you have selected a **Project** from the menu.
2. Click **Visual Editor**.

> <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/ve-main-menu.png" width="90%" title="Visual Editor in the main menu."/>

Reviewer 5: Can we cut off the bottom half of this image? It's big for just showing the menu selection.

Reviewer 5: Also "Visual Editor in the main menu" might be more helpful if we say in the Develop menu. Might make more sense for ereaders.

> <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/ve-main-menu.png" width="90%" title="Visual Editor in the main menu."/>

Author: I'll make it smaller. Wanted to give full context so there's no confusion
```suggestion
<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/ve-main-menu.png" width="60%" title="Visual Editor in the Develop section of the main menu."/>
```

3. From the right side, click **Get started** and then click **Create new model**.

> <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/ve-create-new-model.png" width="90%" title="Create a new model from the Visual Editor landing page."/>

Reviewer 5: For this image, you might consider only capturing the white space. Thinking about longer-term image maintenance.

## Navigating the interface

The Visual Editor comprises a series of menus activated by clicking icons surrounding the border of the larger canvas. With none of the menu items activated, the workspace looks like this:

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/ve-screen.png" width="90%" title="The Visual Editor canvas. The number of items is defined in this section." />

> Click on an icon to expand its section or execute an action depending on its purpose. The options are as follows:

Reviewer 5: Love how neat the image looks and this section feels helpful!

Author: Thank you!

1. The model's title. This defaults to "Untitled" but can be edited anytime by clicking on it.
2. The **Operators** toolbar contains the building blocks for creating a model with the editor. 
3. The **SQL code** area displays the SQL that compiles your model.
4. The **Runs and previews** that displays run data and previews data for individual operators.
5. The **Commit history** display.
6. The navigation tab that has icons for (from top to bottom):

>     - Zoom in

Reviewer 5: I see 5 icons in the screen shot and only 4 descriptions.

Author: Good catch! They added a new option

4. Click in the **Group by** field and first select `CUSTOMER_ID` then `PRODUCT_ID`.
5. Configure the next three fields with the following:
    - **Function:** Count
    - **Column:** PRODUCT_ID
    - **Alias:** count_PRODUCT_ID

    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/aggregation.png" width="90%" title="The configured aggregation operator tile." />

6. Click the **Play icon** to preview the data. You're starting to see the results you're looking for, but the data is scattered. Let's clean it up a bit more.

:::tip

As your model grows, you can zoom in and out to view your needs. Click and hold in empty canvas space to drag your setup across the screen. Click the **Fit view** icon to see your entire model on the screen. Click the **Auto layout** icon to auto-arrange the tiles efficiently. 

:::

### Add some order

There's a lot of data there. Dozens of customers are buying hundreds of products. You will sort it so that the customers are listed ascending by their CUSTOMER_ID number, with the most purchased products listed in descending order. 

1. Drag the **Order** operator over to the right of the **Aggregation** tile and connec them.

> 2. Click the pencil **edit icon**.

Author: ```suggestion
2. Click the **pencil edit icon**.
```

:::tip

Want to practice on your own? Try adding a **Filter** operator that removes items with less than 10 sales for any customer ID. Be sure to run the preview and verify the data is correct.

:::

## Configure your output model

Now that you've built your model, you need to customize the output name and location:
1. Drag the **Output Model** operator to the right of your **Order** operator. 
2. Connect the **Order** and **Output Model** operators.
3. The **Output Model** configuration will default to the name of your Visual Editor project and the default models directory. Click the **pencil edit icon** to configure the optional fields:
    - Edit the **Model name** field if you want the name to be different than that of your project.
    - Edit the **File path** if you have a custom directory for your Visual Editor models. 
    - Hover over a column name and click the **-** icon to remove it from the output model.
4. Click the **play icon** to preview your final model. 

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/output-model.png" width="90%" title="The output model configures your final model's name and location." />

:::tip Model locations

> It might be a good idea to customize the location for Visual Editor models to keep them separate from other dbt Cloud models. Check with your dbt admins to get best practices and ideas for Visual Editor model locations and naming conventions.

Author: ```suggestion
You can customize the location for Visual Editor models to keep them separate from other dbt Cloud models. Check with your dbt admins for best practices and ideas for Visual Editor model locations and naming conventions.
```

:::

## Run and share your model

Now that you've built a model that results in the data you want, it's time to run it and push it to your Git repo. Before you run your model, keep a few items in mind:

> - When you run previews (at any stage in the process) it does not affect the state in your warehouse. So, you can test and develop in the Visual Editor without impacting anything outside of the dbt Cloud Development environment.

Author: ```suggestion
- When you run previews (at any stage in the process), it does not affect the state of your warehouse. So, you can test and develop in the Visual Editor without impacting anything outside of the dbt Cloud Development environment.
```

- When you're ready to use this mode in a downstream tool, you can run it to materialize it in your data warehouse development schema.

> - Once your model is ready for production and be used by others or orchestrated, commit it and open a PR.

Author: ```suggestion
- Once your model is ready for production and ready to be used by others or orchestrated, commit it and open a PR.
```

---
title: "Quickstart for the dbt Cloud Visual Editor"
id: "visual-editor"
level: 'Beginner'
icon: 'dbt'
hide_table_of_contents: true

> tags: ['Visual Editor','Analyist', 'dbt Cloud','model']

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
tags: ['Visual Editor','Analyst', 'dbt Cloud','model']
```

:::note beta feature

The Visual Editor is currently in a limited beta. [Contact us](https://www.getdbt.com/contact/) if you're interested in joining it. Features currently in the beta are subject to change or removal.

:::

The dbt Cloud Visual Editor offers a quick and straightforward way for anyone to build analytics models, no background in analytics engineering is required! In this guide, you will learn about:

- Accessing the Visual Editor and creating a new model
- Navigating the interface
- Building a model using operators
- Committing your changes to Git
- Locating your Visual Editor model and data

## Prerequisites

To use the Visual Editor, you must meet the following prerequisites:

- Be on an [Enterprise dbt Cloud account](/faqs/Accounts/cloud-upgrade-instructions#enterprise-plan)
- You have the following configured on your account:
    - A data warehouse connection
    - Integration with a Git provider
- Source models for the Visual Editor must have been run at least once in production
- You have a `developer` license
- You have credentials configured for your data warehouse and Git provider in the **Your profile** section of the **Account settings**

> :::note

Author: ```suggestion
:::note Prerequisite for using the Jaffle Shop
```

    - Auto-layout option for the individual operator tiles
7. The [Copilot](/docs/cloud/dbt-copilot) icon (where available). Use natural language to build your dbt Visual Editor models.
8. The **Run** command executes `dbt run` for the model.
9. This button is initially a **Commit** command for your integrated Git provider. It will change to "Open pull request" once your first commit is made. The button will not initially appear until you begin working in the canvas area.

## Create a model

This section will walk you through creating a model with operators using sample data from the [Jaffle Shop](https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle-shop) project. With this guide, you will create a basic model that transforms two datasets to build a view of repeat customer purchases while you consider a loyalty program for your shop. 

The operators are the heart of your model. They determine what data will be transformed and how. Click the **+** icon to open the operator menu.

Operators are divided into three types:
- **Input:** Input operators configure the source data.
- **Transform:** Transform operators change and shape your data.

> - **Output:** Output operators determine your models name and location.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Output:** Output operators define your model name and location.
```

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/operators.png" width="90%" title="The operator’s menu on the side of the Visual Editor canvas." />

Read more about the [individual operators](/docs/cloud/visual-editor-interface#operators) to understand the basic purpose of each. The dbt model created by the Visual Editor builds off of existing models. In this guide, there will be input (source) models and an output model (what you are building) which will be _your model_.  

> ### Operator tiles

Reviewer 5: This "Operator tiles" section feels like it could go after the procedure as a reference. I was beginning to wonder when we'd get to the steps. We could reference it in step 2 of "Create your model from pre-existing models" in a to "learn more about" sentence. This way for those who need more they can look at that section but others can forge ahead quickly.

Author: Good call out!

The operators are drag-and-drop from their menu to the canvas, and when they are dropped they will create a tile.

The tiles have the same basic setup with different fields depending on their function. All operators except for **Model** must be connected to another tile before configuring. Once configured, they’ll have the same basic layout.

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/operator-tile.png" width="90%" title="An operator tile with configurations filled out." />

> 1. **The connectors:** Click-and-drag to the connector on another operator to link them.

Reviewer 5: What do the L and R mean? Presumable left and right, but what's that about?

> 1. **The connectors:** Click-and-drag to the connector on another operator to link them.

Author: ```suggestion
1. **The connectors:** Click-and-drag to the connector on another operator to link them. Some connectors have L and R markers. When implementing joins, they designate the left and right joins, respectively.
```

2. Connect the aggregation operator to the join operator. 
3. Click **Configure aggregation** in the **Aggregation tile**.
4. Click in the **Group by** field and first select `CUSTOMER_ID` then `PRODUCT_ID`.
5. Configure the next three fields with the following:
    - **Function:** Count
    - **Column:** PRODUCT_ID
    - **Alias:** count_PRODUCT_ID

    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/aggregation.png" width="90%" title="The configured aggregation operator tile." />

6. Click the **Play icon** to preview the data. You're starting to see the results you're looking for, but the data is scattered. Let's clean it up a bit more.

:::tip

As your model grows, you can zoom in and out to view your needs. Click and hold in empty canvas space to drag your setup across the screen. Click the **Fit view** icon to see your entire model on the screen. Click the **Auto layout** icon to auto-arrange the tiles efficiently. 

:::

### Add some order

There's a lot of data there. Dozens of customers are buying hundreds of products. You will sort it so that the customers are listed ascending by their CUSTOMER_ID number, with the most purchased products listed in descending order. 

> 1. Drag the **Order** operator over to the right of the **Aggregation** tile and connec them.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
1. Drag the **Order** operator over to the right of the **Aggregation** tile and connect them.
```

    - Edit the **Model name** field if you want the name to be different than that of your project.
    - Edit the **File path** if you have a custom directory for your Visual Editor models. 
    - Hover over a column name and click the **-** icon to remove it from the output model.
4. Click the **play icon** to preview your final model. 

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/output-model.png" width="90%" title="The output model configures your final model's name and location." />

:::tip Model locations

You can customize the location for Visual Editor models to keep them separate from other dbt Cloud models. Check with your dbt admins for best practices and ideas for Visual Editor model locations and naming conventions.

:::

## Run and share your model

Now that you've built a model that results in the data you want, it's time to run it and push it to your Git repo. Before you run your model, keep a few items in mind:

- When you run previews (at any stage in the process), it does not affect the state of your warehouse. So, you can test and develop in the Visual Editor without impacting anything outside of the dbt Cloud Development environment.

> - When you're ready to use this mode in a downstream tool, you can run it to materialize it in your data warehouse development schema.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- When you're ready to use this model in a downstream tool, you can run it to materialize it in your data warehouse development schema.
```

> - Once your model is ready for production and ready to be used by others or orchestrated, commit it and open a PR.

Reviewer 5: Best to be specific in case it's not clear to some.
```suggestion
- Once your model is ready for production and ready to be used by others or orchestrated, commit it and open a pull request.
```

### Run

To run your model, you only need to click the big **Run** button. With the Visual Editor, there is no command line and no need to memorize a list of commands; there is only **Run**. Click it to see the results populate in the **Runs and previews** pane.

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/run-results.png" width="90%" title="The results of a successful run in the 'Runs and previews' pane." />

> This will [materialize](/docs/build/materializations) the data as a `view` in your developer schema in the database. Once the model has been merged with your project and `dbt run` is executed in your Staging or Production environments, it will be materialized as a view in their related schemas. 

Reviewer 5: > their related schemas

Who is their? can we just say "related schemas?"

> This will [materialize](/docs/build/materializations) the data as a `view` in your developer schema in the database. Once the model has been merged with your project and `dbt run` is executed in your Staging or Production environments, it will be materialized as a view in their related schemas. 

Author: ```suggestion
This will [materialize](/docs/build/materializations) the data as a `view` in your developer schema in the database. Once the model has been merged with your project and `dbt run` is executed in your Staging or Production environments, it will be materialized as a view in related schemas. 
```

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/preview-data.png" width="90%" title="Preview of the transformed data in Snowflake." />

:::tip

Have dbt [Copilot](/docs/cloud/dbt-copilot) enabled for your dbt Cloud Enterprise account? Clear the board and try using natural language to build the model in this guide without manually configuring any operators.

:::

### Git commit

The models built in the Visual Editor are a part of your larger dbt project. They are stored in the `visual_editor` folder of your `/models` directory. This is all done automatically; you don't have to configure any paths or directories. 

> <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/ve-model-folder.png" width="90%" title="Example of the Visual Editors model path in GitHub." />

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/ve-model-folder.png" width="90%" title="Example of the Visual Editor's model path in GitHub." />
```

Reviewer: Hiya @matthewshaver 

One of the pills has a small typo. I've attached a screenshot.

Kind Regards
Natalie
<img width="541" alt="Screenshot 2025-02-24 at 14 21 22" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/be7fc5e3-dc36-4ed2-b64f-fa748497675e" />

Reviewer: Also, should "model" be capitalised? as everything else (except dbt Cloud) is capped?

Kind Regards
Natalie

However, it won't be created in your Git repo until you commit your first model. So, back in the model's view:

1. Click **Commit** in the top right.
    - If you've already created a commit and wish to make more, click the arrow next to **Create a pull request** to see the **Commit** option.
2. Fill out the **Description** field with information about your model. If it's long, part of it will be included in the pull request title, and the rest will be in the body. That's okay! You can correct it during the PR creation process. 
3. Click **Commit**. 
4. The **Commit** button will change to **Create a pull request**. You can add more commits, but click the **Create a pull request** button for now. You will then be redirected to your Git provider in a new tab.

> The following examples use GitHub as the provider:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The following example uses GitHub as the provider:
```
